around 300 ancient stone spheres called
dikey spheres were found in costa rica
in the 1930s
two mysteries keep scientists baffled
how were these huge rocks
transported for miles from the mountains
before the wheel had been introduced to
the americas
and how were the stones shaped into
almost perfect spheres
hundreds of nazca lines in peru are
etched into the ground
they range from basic shapes to distinct
drawings of animals
such as llamas and lizards and even
plants
scientists have been studying them for
over 80 years but still can't decide if
they're astronomical patterns
directions to water sources or traces of
a visit from
outer space in the mid-1980s
a scuba diver discovered the yanagumi
monument off the coast of japan
scientists are positive this collection
of structures is thousands of years old
but they still can't decide if it's
natural or man-made in case it proves to
be an ancient city
the new mystery is what lost
civilization built it
and how did it make it to the bottom of
the sea
the grenada underwater sculpture park
opened in 2006
is more than just one weird statue it's
like a whole city with real size human
sculptures
26 kids holding hands in a circle and
the loss corresponded are the most
famous
all this is supposed to help protect the
reefs but the meaning of each statue is
an open discussion
the georgia guidestones is a collection
of giant stones in a star pattern
it gives direction for the
post-apocalypse in eight languages
including hindi chinese and swahili it
also has an
astronomical calendar finished in 1980
and built to last centuries
no one knows who or why it was built
a monument to the alien alyosha is the
number one tourist attraction in
russia's
molupka's anomalous zone in 1983
a geologist saw a luminous object over
the forest
and then found some perfectly round
spots in the snow
the alien sculpture is the height of an
average adult man
and was placed there in 2011. the famous
stone heads of easter island have been
around for hundreds of years
no one knows exactly why they were built
some scientists think the local people
believed the statues would make the soil
more fertile soil analysis proved the
heads did their job well
it's the best agricultural spot on the
island
back in 1812 for an unknown reason
an english farmer paid a local painter
to remove tons of soil on a hillside
and fill the contours with chalk the
painter ran away with the money
so the farmer had to pay a second time
to get the alton barnes
white horse finished around 11 000 years
ago in present-day turkey with no cities
or metal tools whatsoever
some incredibly skilled craftsmen
completed goldbecky tepa
while they managed to chip and lift
limestone blocks three times as heavy as
a t-rex
and what they symbolize is still unknown
carhenge is the weirdest landmark of
nebraska
its author studied the real stonehenge
and created his own version out of
old cars as a tribute to his father some
cars stand like monoliths
others are connected into arches when
asked why he did all this
the creator of the construction said why
not
another stonehenge lookalike was found
on the bottom of lake michigan
in 2007 there's a group of rocks in a
circle
and carvings of a mastodon this beast
ceased existing over 10 000 years ago so
the carving has to be older than that
its location is kept secret from the
public good luck finding it
angkor wad in cambodia is the largest
religious monument in the world
it takes days to see all of it and
centuries to solve all its secrets
it's facing west while all other temples
of its kind
faced east where the sun rises and all
of its bass reliefs
are read counterclockwise the opposite
of normal
in one of the driest spots on earth the
atacama desert in chile
there's a hand coming out of the sand
human helplessness
vulnerability or the spirit that wins
over anything
everybody sees the statue their own way
and no one knows
why it was placed in such a remote
location
right in the pavement outside the state
library of victoria and milburn
there's another library a sinking one
is it symbol of disappearing knowledge
or a new civilization
breaking through the ground to bring new
wisdom
up to you in the financial district of
paris
there's a giant thumb which is an exact
replica of its creator's digit
it's been around since 1965 and weighs
the same as three elephants
it's not the only monument of its kind
there are other huge thumbs by the same
artist
spread across the world the hagar kim
meaning standing stones site in malta
was completed around 3000 bce
some stone age genius most likely using
stone tools
managed to set the rocks in such a way
that they could show the beginning and
end of the year on march 21st and
september 21st
the sun is exactly in the middle
three thousand standing rocks were
spread over present-day brittany france
in the neolithic period
after centuries of trying scientists
still can't tell the purpose of this
largest collection of rocks in the world
it looks like it was created by a
culture related to stonehenge
which means travel and technology may
have been in place
long before we realized in 1923
a guy in florida who was dumped the day
before his wedding
started putting together the coral
castle a monument to lost
love how a five foot tall man with a
fourth grade education
managed to lift stone blocks eight times
as heavy as a hippo
all by himself will of course forever
remain his secret
ball back in lebanon is a huge stone
souvenir of the roman empire
they used to call it the city of the sun
the oldest and deepest
part of the ruins was built by a culture
unknown to historians
so is the answer to the question why was
this spot
so important to the romans the great
zimbabwe ruins were once home to 18 000
people and gave name to a whole country
the first european explorers came here
in the 16th century
they couldn't believe a civilization was
able to build such a fortress among the
gold mines
their drainage system still works
centuries later
one of the biggest mysteries in history
is the great sphinx of giza egypt
who was the lion with the human head how
did the ancient egyptians
manage to construct this huge statue
they kept no records
and perhaps they didn't want us to know
since many attempts to study the sphinx
result in mysterious accidents
enough of the earthly mysteries let's
take it one step higher
right into space in 1976
the viking one spacecraft was traveling
around mars looking for its sister ship
it took some photos of the planet and
when nasa studied them
they saw a huge rock shaped like a human
face
they explained it was a simple game of
light and shadows
still many people see it as proof that
life on mars exists
or existed a long time ago